# Interrogating epigenetics in Lewy body disease in a multi-cohort meta-analysis of DNA methylation
Supplementary methods, data and scripts  

## Data Citations
Pihlstrøm L, Shireby G, Geut H, Henriksen SP, Rozemuller AJM, Tunold JA, Hannon E, Francis P, Thomas AJ, Love S, Mill J, van de Berg WDJ, Toft M. Epigenome-wide association study of human frontal cortex identifies differential methylation in Lewy body pathology. Nat Commun. 2022 Aug 22;13(1):4932. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-32619-z. PMID: 35995800; PMCID: PMC9395387.

Smith RG, Pishva E, Shireby G, Smith AR, Roubroeks JAY, Hannon E, Wheildon G, Mastroeni D, Gasparoni G, Riemenschneider M, Giese A, Sharp AJ, Schalkwyk L, Haroutunian V, Viechtbauer W, van den Hove DLA, Weedon M, Brokaw D, Francis PT, Thomas AJ, Love S, Morgan K, Walter J, Coleman PD, Bennett DA, De Jager PL, Mill J, Lunnon K. A meta-analysis of epigenome-wide association studies in Alzheimer's disease highlights novel differentially methylated loci across cortex. Nat Commun. 2021 Jun 10;12(1):3517. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-23243-4. PMID: 34112773; PMCID: PMC8192929.

Wheildon G, Smith AR, Weymouth L, Harvey J, Pishva E, Kouhsar M, MacBean LF, Troakes C, Smith RG and Lunnon K, DNA methylation profiling in Huntington’s disease reveals disease associated changes in the striatum and entorhinal cortex. (In Preperation)

Shireby, G., Dempster, E.L., Policicchio, S. et al. DNA methylation signatures of Alzheimer’s disease neuropathology in the cortex are primarily driven by variation in non-neuronal cell-types. Nat Commun 13, 5620 (2022). 


## Supplementary Methods
### Meta-analysis cohort summaries
Cohort Descriptions
Samples were sourced from the UK Brain Bank Network (UKBBN), an online database covering brain bank centers across the UK and annotated with demographics, neuropathological and clinical assessments. All available records on the UKBBN were downloaded (June 2019) for manual selection. First, to determine LB positive case availability, records were filtered on a basis of neuropathological diagnostic criteria. Only cases with an annotation of Braak LB Stage of 3-6, or annotation of neocortical or limbic LB pathology were selected as Lewy body disease cases. The majority of samples matching our search criteria were found in brain banks at Oxford, Newcastle, Imperial College London and University College London. Samples were broadly sourced on the basis of a primary diagnosis of either PD or DLB. Exclusions were made for non-sporadic synucleinopathies or misdiagnosed primary symptoms (e.g., multiple system atrophy (MSA), PSP etc.), severe cerebrovascular disease or amygdala predominant pathology. Seventy-one cases had annotation for LBD relevant pathology following the 2009 Unified staging scheme but lacked Braak LB staging annotation (Beach et al., 2009). To harmonize these annotations for analysis alongside the Braak scheme, records were converted in accordance with the BrainNet Europe Consortium (Alafuzoff et al., 2009). Sixty-one cases with “Neocortical Lewy Body Disease” were annotated as Braak LB Stage 6. The remaining ten cases showed evidence from the available additional neuropathology notes of LB pathology in the temporal cortex or cingulate gyrus and were annotated as Braak LB Stage 5. Samples were included if they had a primary neuropathologically confirmed diagnosis of PD or DLB and, where primary diagnosis was absent, had a “High” assessment of the likelihood that the pathological profiles were associated with typical DLB clinical syndrome from the 2017 Lancet criteria (McKeith et al., 2017). From this criterion we selected 28 cases with Braak LB Stage 3, 38 cases with Braak LB Stage 4, 39 cases with Braak LB Stage 5 and 211 cases with Braak LB Stage 6. An additional 101 control individuals without neurological disease were sourced, which were chosen to exclude significant cerebrovascular pathology or substantial AD-related pathology (Braak NFT stage > 2). In total, a set of 417 total donors were chosen for our study, with two brain regions sourced for the majority of individuals. These brain regions were the ACC (Brodmann Area 24) and the PFC (Brodmann Area 9). All samples received for our study had informed consent at local brain banks, covered under individual ethical agreements at the center (REC references 24/NE/0012, 15/SC/0639, 18/LO/0721, 23/WA/0273). Ethical approval for our study was granted from the University of Exeter Medical School Research Ethics Committee (13/02/009). 

Data for the Netherlands Brain Bank (NBB) cohort has been previously detailed in Pihlstrøm et al., 2022, where they had analysed PFC tissue from 73 control, 29 incidental Lewy Body disease, 139 PD (of which 74 were PDD), and 81 DLB patients (Pihlstrøm et al., 2022). Data from the Brains for Dementia Research Cohort (BDR) was previously detailed in Shireby et al., 2022 (Shireby et al., 2022). Neurological controls were selected with absence of LB-pathology and low AD co-pathology (Braak NFT < 3), along with the absence of significant neuropathological co-pathology (TDP-43 pathology, gross infarction, severe cerebrovascular disease). Eight samples overlapped between the UKBBN and BDR cohort and were removed from the BDR cohort prior to analysis. Case samples were selected in keeping with the same criteria as the UKBBN. A final set of 116 samples from the BDR cohort were used for the meta-analysis. 

## Sample Preparation and Methylomic Profiling
For the UKBBN cohort, tissue pieces ranging between 25-35 mg were cut from frozen PFC or ACC tissue before being milled over liquid nitrogen. Following tissue grinding DNA was extracted using the Qiagen AllPrep DNA/RNA/miRNA Universal kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions and stored at 4°C. 500ng of DNA from each sample was bisulfite treated using the Zymo EZ-96 DNA methylation Gold kit. Methylomic profiling was completed after sample randomization using the Illumina Infinium MethylationEPIC v1.0 BeadChip. 

## DNA Methylation Analysis, Quality Control and Normalization
Data processing was performed using R, and signal intensity files were loaded into R using the minfi package (Aryee et al., 2014). All data was subjected to a thorough quality control (QC) pipeline using the minfi (Aryee et al., 2014) and wateRmelon packages (Pidsley et al., 2013). A MethylumiSet object was created from iDATs using the readEPIC function from wateRmelon (Pidsley et al., 2013) and an RGChannelSet was created using the minfi package (Aryee et al., 2014). Samples were excluded from further analysis for the following reasons: (1) they had a median methylated or unmethylated sample intensity < 1500 or < 1000, respectively, (2) that the bisulfite conversion efficiency was < 80%, (3) there was a mis-match between reported and predicted sex, (4) if the sample was determined to be an outlier using the outlyx function or, (5) if the samples were found to be cryptically related to one another or unrelated to its matched sample from the other brain region. Finally, using the pfilter function in the WateRmelon package (Pidsley et al., 2013) samples with a detection p-value  > 0.05 in > 5% of probes, probes with < three beadcount in 5% of samples and probes having 1% of samples with a detection p-value > 0.05 were also removed. Following QC, samples not passing the aforementioned checks were removed and quantile normalisation was performed using the dasen function in the wateRmelon package (Pidsley et al., 2013). Beta values were extracted for further analysis. Cell type proportion calculations were implemented using the projectCellTypeWithError() function within the CETYGO package (Vellame et al., 2023), using the reference panel resolving enriched profiles for GABAergic neuron, Glutamatergic neuron, Oligodendrocyte, Microglia and Astrocyte enriched reference data (Hannon et al., 2024). 

## Within cohort epigenome wide association assessment
Prior to meta-analysis, the association with LB Braak stage was assessed within each cohort in a harmonized approach. Within each cohort, linear models were fit using the base lm() function in R to test for associations between LB Braak Stage and DNA methylation at each site of the genome. This is displayed by the following equation for the NBB and BDR analyses:

CpG Site ~ Braak LB Stage+Age+Sex+PMI+Cell Proportion+Batch+Braak NFT Stage…

For the UKBBN analysis, given two brain regions were present per individuals, this caused a violation of linear regression by non-independence between samples type. To correct for this, a mixed effect model was employed using the lme() function within the nlme package. Brain region was included as a fixed effect covariate and individual ID was supplied as a random-intercept covariate to account for paired observations. This can be displayed in the following formula:

CpG Site ~ Braak LB Stage+Age+Sex+PMI+Cell Proportion+Batch+Braak NFT Stage+(1┤|Individual)…

Consistent covariates of age, sex, PMI, cell proportions and Braak NFT stage were included in all three cohorts. For the UKBBN and BDR cohorts, brain bank source and array plate batch were included as processing batch variables. For NBB, only processing plate batch was included. For each cohort, model p-value inflation was assessed genome wide and surrogate variables added to reduce the lambda value below a 1.1 threshold. One surrogate variable was included for BDR and three were included for NBB, with no surrogate variables required to reduce inflation in UKBBN (Supplementary Figure 1).

## Meta-analysis
Estimated regression coefficients and standard errors were extracted from each model and used for meta-analysis of all probes overlapping each dataset (n = 774,310). Harmonized models were meta-analysed using the metagen function in the meta R package (Balduzzi et al., 2019), as had been employed for previous EWAS meta-analyses (Pihlstrøm et al., 2022; Shireby et al., 2022; Fodder et al., 2023; Smith et al., 2021), which applies an inverse variance weighting. Both fixed and random effects were assessed, with the fixed effects model being the primary interpreted results. In addition to fixed and random effects modelling statistics (Effect estimates, standard error and p-values), the I2 heterogeneity measure and p-values were also extracted.

For interpretation of results, a strict genome-wide significance threshold was based on simulation and permutation testing to define a significance level as determined by Mansell and colleagues (Mansell et al., 2019).. This approach sets a consistent significance threshold of p-value < 9 × 10-8 for any study utilizing the Illumina EPIC array and was determined based on multiple permutations of null EWAS study scenarios to determine a 5% family wise error rate A more lenient multiple testing False Discovery Rate (FDR) significance threshold (corrected Q-value < 0.05) was also used in our stufy. Finally for more exploratory post-hoc analysis, a lenient suggestive threshold was applied of uncorrected p-value < 1 x 10-5.

## Differentially methylated region analysis
To identify differentially methylated regions (DMRs) from summary statistics from our meta-analyses, we employed the combined p-values method as implemented in the python package comb-p (Pedersen et al., 2012), which identifies DMRs based on a defined sliding window, correcting for spatial autocorrelation between adjacent methylation sites. We performed this with the default settings for consistency with prior meta-analyses, with a distance of 500 base-pairs (bp) and a seeded p-value of 1 x 10-4. Significant DMRs were defined as those with a Sidak’s multiple testing correction p-value < 0.05 and with ≥ three methylation sites residing in the identified DMR. For plotting, EnsDb.Hsapiens.v75 and GenomicRanges were used to extract annotated transcripts for genome build 37 hg19.

## Gene ontology analysis
Gene ontology (GO) analysis was performed using the package methylGSA function methylRRA (Ren and Kuan, 2018). This method assesses genome wide summary statistics as summarized by p-values and aggregates them around gene annotations, controlling for the number of CpGs annotated to differing genes. We utilised the overrepresentation analysis approach, which applies a within gene Bonferroni correction and a across gene FDR correction to prioritise genes for ontological enrichment analyses. Given the overlap of similar ontology terms, for interpretation of significant enriched terms in our results, we further employed the REVIGO method, as implemented in the rrvgo R package (Sayols, 2023) using default parameters to identify shared parent terms for closely related GO annotations. 

## Cross disease epigenomic signature comparison
Assessment of overlap between EWASs was conducted by assessing the directionality of estimated effects in available summary statistics. To statistically compare shared direction of effects, a one-sided binomial sign test was performed to test for greater than expected overlap in association directionality. For comparison to AD related Braak NFT associated signatures, summary statistics were sourced from Smith et al. 2021, which had performed a cross-cortical meta-analysis (Smith et al., 2021). This had utilized 1,408 unique donors, which had been profiled on the Illumina Infinium Methylation 450K BeadChip. For assessment of HD-associated signatures, summary statistics were sourced from Wheildon et al. 2025. This included matched data for 38 entorhinal cortex and 37 striatal samples, profiled on the Illumina EPIC array. Our Braak NFT EWAS signature comprised the 208 sites on the EPIC array corresponding to the 220 sites passing Bonferroni significance in Smith et al. 2021. For the Braak LB signature, given that more modest p-values were identified, we used the 72 sites passing out suggestive p-value threshold of 1 x 10-5 in the primary full cohort LB pathology meta-analysis. Following all comparisons tested, a Bonferroni correction was applied for interpreting the significant overlap in shared direction of association.

## Epigenetic classification analysis 
To further compare the epigenetic signatures of the Braak LB and Braak NFT meta-analysis, we used an elasticnet model trained using loci prioritised from the EWAS. The LB model was trained in the UKBBN and NBB pure pathology subset, using the 48 loci passing suggestive association (p < 1 x 10-5) in the secondary pure LB pathology subset cohort meta-analysis. The BDR dataset was used for validation to account for data leakage and non-independence between training and testing cohorts. Models were trained for binarized prediction of cortical LB pathology (total n = 625, Braak LB 0: n = 246, Braak LB 5-6: n = 379) across 10-fold cross validated folds and with the alpha value set to 0.5 (Supplementary Table 8 & 9). This model was then tested in the BDR cohort using the same samples employed for the primary meta analysis, binarized for cortical pathology (total n = 99, Braak LB 0: n = 67, Braak LB 5-6: n = 32). To compare to predictions for Braak NFT pathology, a similar model based on 110 loci from Smith et al., 2021, previously detailed in their publication was tested on the same subset. To assess the accuracy of binarized cortical NFT prediction, the same subset of AD relevant cases and controls was used as those tested in the original publication (total n = 454, Braak NFT 0-II: n = 196, Braak NFT V-VI: n = 258).   Models were assessed for accuracy using Area Under the receiver operator curve (AUC), Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC) and balanced accuracy.

## Methylation Quantitative Loci Analysis and Genomic Enrichment Analysis
Methylation quantitative loci (mQTLs) were identified in the UKBBN data using a set of 473 samples with matched Illumina Global Screening Array (GSA) genotyping data. mQTLs were tested solely for the 30 loci at FDR significance in the primary full cohort LB pathology meta-analysis. The R package matrix eQTL was used to identify methylation sites with significant association to genetic loci (Shabalin, 2012). Methylation beta-values were tested against genotype (coded additively) utilizing a linear model for association testing while adjusting for confounders of age and sex.

Matrix eQTL was run in linear model mode with an additive genetic model to assess cis- and trans-mQTLs. Cis-mQTLs were defined as SNPs located within ±1 Mb of the associated CpG site, while trans-mQTLs correspond to SNPs > 1 Mb from the CpG. The significance threshold was adjusted for multiple testing using FDR correction, with a significance threshold of q < 0.05.

To test for genomic enrichment in LB associated methylation loci in known regions prioritized by prior GWAS, we employed Brown’s method, as implemented in the EmpiricalBrownsMethod R package to aggregate p-values across multiple methylation loci (Poole, 2024). Regions in linkage disequilibrium (LD) with primary loci in GWAS were extracted for AD, PD and DLB. For PD (Kim et al 2024) and AD (Kunkle et al 2019), reported regions were taken directly from the supplementary material of the respective study. For DLB (Chia et al. 2021), as regions were not directly reported, regions were manually annotated based on the minimum and maximum position of variants at genome wide significance (p < 5 x 10-8) in the genome-wide summary statistics around the five primary loci reported in the study. P-values were FDR corrected to account for the number of total genomic regions tested. Methylation beta matrixes were z-score normalized using the scale() function in R within each cohort, to allow for the correlation calculations within the Brown’s methodology accounting for inter-cohort variability whilst retaining the inter-site correlations. 

